# Setuptools stuff

The most common use case for data files distributed with a package is for use _by_ the package, usually by including data files in the package directory.  Setuptools offers three ways to specify data files to be included in your packages:
1. `include_package_data=True`: accept all data files and directories matched by `MANIFEST.in`
2. `package_data`: specify additional patterns to match files not matched by `MANIFEST.in` or in source control
3. `exclude_package_data`: even if they would have been included due to preceding options

SEE ALSO `data_files`, notes below.

It is strongly recommended that, if you are using data files, you should use the ResourceManager API of `pkg_resources` to access them.  It's part of setuptools so there is no reason not to use its resource management API.  Better than using `__file__`.  (PCH: looks like `pkg_resources` is closely tied to eggs and eggs are deprecated in favor of wheels?  Damn it.)

Setuptools will generate a file called `native_libs.txt` for you.  It detects shared library extensions.  Need to check this out.

Setuptools has "entry points" that allow it to install various shortcut tools calling certain functions (`main`-type functions) in your project.  These could be command-line tools or GUI startup scripts.  Interesting.

There is a way to distribute a distutils extension (I am thinking maybe that is a C extension?) as a separate project, and have projects that need the extension just refer to it in their `setup_requires` argument.  Ah.  Maybe that's... yeah a C extension for distutils itself?  Hm.

## Extensions

The setuptools documentation says practically nothing about `Extension` objects.  I maybe need to check the distutils documentation to learn about building extensions.

### `MANIFEST.in`

[Main answer by Jan Vlcinsky with commetns by Bruno Bronosky on Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24727709/do-python-projects-need-a-manifest-in-and-what-should-be-in-it)

When using the standard folder structure and a `setup.py` file, you don't need a `MANIFEST.in` file.  It's useful on top of setuptools or distutils in case you want to add or remove default files to include.
1. Make sure `setup.py` has all the files you feel are important (modules, packages, scripts), in `setup()`
2. Clarify if there are some files to add or exclude; if not, no `MANIFEST.in`
3. If it's needed though, create it.  There you would add _e.g._ `tests*/*.py`, `README.rst` if you don't use `README.txt`, `docs` files and possibly some data files for the test suite.

Example:
```
include README.rst
include COPYING.txt
```

When you run `python setup.py sdist`, these files should wind up in the tarball created under `dist/`.

Regarding `package_data` and `data_files`:
- `package_data` lists files that get installed with your package into `dist-packages/yourpackage` which would have been skipped because they don't have a `*.py` name.
- `data_files` lists files that get installed outside of your package; each entry specifies a target path that is prefixed with `sys.prefix` if it is relative or created directly (permissions permitting) if it begins with a `/`.

## `data_files`

I also read that `data_files` can be used to specify additional files needed by the module distribution: config files, message catalogs, data files, anything that doesn't fit in the previous categories.  It's a sequence of `(directory,files)` pairs.  Each file name in `files` is interpreted relative to the `setup.py` script at the top of the package source distribution.  You can specify the directory where the data files will be installed, but you cannot rename the data files themselves.

```
setup(...,
      data_files=[('bitmaps', ['bm/b1.gif', 'bm/b2.gif']),
                  ('config', ['cfg/data.cfg'])],
     )
```

The installation path will be relative to `sys.prefix` for system installations, or `site.USER_BASE` for user installations.

### What is `sys.prefix`

> A string giving the site-specific directory prefix where the platform independent Python files are installed; by default, this is the string '/usr/local'. This can be set at build time with the --prefix argument to the configure script. The main collection of Python library modules is installed in the directory prefix/lib/pythonX.Y while the platform independent header files (all except pyconfig.h) are stored in prefix/include/pythonX.Y, where X.Y is the version number of Python, for example 3.2.

In a virtual environment, this path will be changed appropriately.

So I see that `data_files` will install things in, for instance, `/usr/local/`.  Hmm.
