# Distributions and packages and namespace packages

A rabbit hole I fell into.

## Distributions and packages

From PEP-508:

A _distribution name_ is the primary identifier for a distribution.  It's present in all dependency specifications and is sufficient to be a specification on its own.  PyPI places strict restrictions on names, in particular they must match a case insensitive regex or won't be accepted.

From https://docs.python.org/3.7/distutils/setupscript.html:

> A distribution may relate to packages in three specific ways:
>- It can require packages or modules.
>- It can provide packages or modules.
>- It can obsolete packages or modules.

#### Namespace packages and regular packages

From PEP-420 (2012), for future reference:

This is a way to split a single Python package across multiple directories on disk.  The idea is that the import machinery will construct the list of directories that make up the package.

The problem (PEP-402) was that package contents are highly interdependent and cannot be pulled apart, but some packages exist in order to provide a separate namespace.  So it should be possible to distribute sub-packages or submodules of these namespace packages independently.

The requirement for an `__init__` module with a package made this harder.  Those are gone at least now.

> Packages in other languages are typically just the _union_ of appropriately-named directories across the _entire_ import or inclusion path.

Perl, for instance, says a package is purely a namespace and may coincidentally be the name of a module as well.  In Python historically submodules must reside in the directory where `__init__.py` is found.

#### Python `__path__` attribute

Packages support a `__path__` attribute, a list containing the name of the directory holding `__init__.py` before the code in that file is executed.

Now, a module `Foo.py` has no `__path__` attribute.  When you try to import `Foo.Bar`, the new import machinery will build a `__path__` attribute by making a list of all `Foo/` subdirectories of directories listed in `sys.path`.

#### Namespace packages, continued

If you want to distribute dozens of separate tools `plisdku.compiler`, `plisdku.fdtd` _etc._, this will be no problem.

If `import plisdku` fails to find `plisdku.py` or `plisdku/__init__.py`, then we try one more time to build a `__path__` by searching for all the `plisdku/` directories on `sys.path`, and putting them in a list.  If the list is non-empty, we create an empty `plisdku` module, and put the list in `plisdku.__path__`.  It has no module contents but you can import submodules and packages from it regardless of location on `sys.path`.

This applies recursively to child packages, so self-contained and virtual packages can contain each other without limitation.

## `setuptools.find_namespace_packages`

Works like `find_packages` but works with PEP-420-compliant implicit namespace packages.

Consider the example structure from the setuptools docs,

```
├── setup.py
├── src
│   └── namespace
│       └── mypackage
│           ├── __init__.py
│           └── mod1.py
└── tests
    └── test_mod1.py
```

with the `setup` invocation

```
setup(name="namespace.mypackage",
      version="0.1",
      package_dir={'': 'src'},
      packages=find_namespace_packages(where='src'))
```

Well this is interesting.  I see here that the distribution would be identified as `namespace.mypackage` and shares a name with its one package.  I am guessing that I could give it some other name without a `.` in it, like say `name=awesome` and let it still install `namespace.mypackage`.  Not sure.






















